URL: https://issc.asu.edu/f-1j-1-students/employment/off-campus-after

Post-OPT
On This Page:
Post-OPT
Post-OPT is a work benefit opportunity to gain off-campus work experience and is requested to be used after the completion of a degree program.
F-1 students are eligible for a total of 12 months of OPT per degree level. Those 12 months can be used while earning your degree (Pre-OPT), after earning your degree (Post-OPT), or a combination of both (Pre- and Post-OPT).
ISSC highly recommends that you attend an OPT Information Session prior to beginning the application process.
OPT Handbook
Eligibility
Requirements:
Maintenance of F-1 status for a minimum of one academic year in a degree program.
Employment must be directly related to your field of study. This includes volunteering and unpaid internships.
You must work at least 20 hours per week.
The following types of work are permitted during Post-OPT (these may not all apply to the STEM OPT Extension):Paid workUnpaid/volunteer workInternshipFreelance/Contract/1099Self-employed business ownerWork through an agency or consulting firmWork with a start-upWork with multiple employers
Paid work
Unpaid/volunteer work
Internship
Freelance/Contract/1099
Self-employed business owner
Work through an agency or consulting firm
Work with a start-up
Work with multiple employers
Conditions:
It is not necessary to have a job when you apply for Post-OPT as USCIS does not require proof of employment when you apply for Post-OPT.
Any approved Pre-OPT will be deducted from your available 12 months of OPT time: accrued at half the rate when used during the semester, in full when used during the summer break when requested at full time.Example: Four months of approved part-time Pre-OPT subtracts 2 months of available OPT while 2 months of approved full-time Pre-OPT subtracts 2 months of available OPT.
Example: Four months of approved part-time Pre-OPT subtracts 2 months of available OPT while 2 months of approved full-time Pre-OPT subtracts 2 months of available OPT.
Undergraduate students completing their degree in the fall or spring semesters will use ASU’sDegree Conferral Dateas their degree program completion date.  Those students who are completing their degree in the summer or in session A of the fall or spring semesters will use ASU’sClasses Enddate as their degree completion date.
Graduate students will review theGraduate Completion Dateswebpage with their academic advisor to determine the best program completion date based on their final academic requirements.
You are not authorized to work or volunteer until you receive your EAD card in the mail and the “Valid From” date printed on your EAD card is valid.
On-campus student-worker positions end upon completion of your degree program. Any student employment, including assistantships (e.g., TA/RA), after the degree completion date is considered unauthorized, and will affect your immigration status unless you have approved Post-OPT and are hired on as a “staff” or “faculty” member at ASU.
During OPT, F-1 status is dependent upon employment.  During any initial 12-month period of post-completion OPT, no student may be unemployed for more than 90 total days.
It is strongly recommended that you obtain health insurance coverage to bridge the gap between the end of your student health insurance and the start date of your employer's health insurance plan or if your employer does not provide health insurance.  VisitASU Health Services - Health Coverage Optionsto see when your insurance will end after graduation.
If 12 months of full-time Curricular Practical Training (CPT) or 12 months of full-time Pre-OPT have been used, you will not be eligible for Post-OPT (including STEM Extension).
When to apply
USCIS can receive applications up to 90 days before your program completion date. To allow for the 7-business day ISSC processing time, 2 to 5 day academic advisor approval process and the 90-day USCIS processing time, ISSC will accept applications up to 97 days prior to your program completion date.
Post-OPT recommended I-20s will be issued no earlier than the 90th day prior to your program completion date.
Be advisedUSCISprocessing timesgenerally increase with applications submitted later in the semester. Is it not uncommon for applications to take an average of 90 days. Therefore, we recommend youapply earlyin the application season!
Please note:Students cannot receive an OPT authorization end date more than 12 months from the end of their 60-day grace period. This means for students that apply later, their OPT may be authorized for a period of less than 12 months. Applying early in the application window increases your chances of obtaining your authorization by your requested start date and receiving OPT for the entire 12-month period.
How to apply
To allow for the 7 business day ISSC processing time, 2 to 5 day academic advisor approval process and the 90-day USCIS processing time, ASU ISSC recommends applying for Post-OPT no more than 97 days prior to your completion date. This will maximize your opportunity to receive your EAD card on time.
Post-OPT recommended I-20s will be ready no earlier than the 90th day prior to your completion date.
Applying for Post-OPT
You get to choose the date you would like OPT authorization to begin, within the 60-day period following your program's end date. Use ourOPT calculatorto help determine your EAD card dates.
Most jobs start on Mondays. Try to select a Monday start day.
Here are some things to consider:
The time you may need to find a job.If you have a job offer, simply select the day your employment begins. If you don’t, you may want to maximize the time you'll have for job-hunting by choosing the latest possible date. The downside, however, is that you cannot begin employment until the start date on your EAD.
Processing times.The ISSC can take up to 7 business days to process the OPT request once we receive a completed application (including the academic advisor approval). USCIS has an average processing time of 90 days; however, please visitUSCIS’s Processing Timeswebsite for their most up-to-date processing times.
You can not change your requested start date.Currently, USCIS does not have a process in place to request a change in your OPT start date while the application is pending.
ISSC processes requests on a first come first serve basis and is unable to expedite requests.If you are interested in expedited processing from USCIS, please visit theirPremium Processingwebpage for details.
There is a maximum of 90 days of unemployment.Students on post-completion OPT may have up to 90 days of unemployment. The 90 days starts counting from your approved OPT/EAD start date (this is the date listed on your EAD card) and is cumulative.
International travel plans.Once you have completed your program, you will be expected to have your EAD card in hand to re-enter the United States.  For more information visit our travel page.
Use theOPT calculatorto help determine your EAD card dates.
The OPT Case Management Payment covers the cost of SEVIS reporting compliance and record management for students on post-completion OPT. While you are on OPT, ISSC will continue to maintain your SEVIS record and provide immigration and advising support.  Support includes biographical changes, address updates, dependent document requests, employer and employment information and updates, travel signatures and I-20 form replacement.
The Case Management Payment must be paid by the student.If you are unable to use your own debit or credit card, you must include a written explanation of your circumstances along with your payment receipt. Please combine both the receipt and your letter of explanation into a single PDF file and upload it as one attachment to your eForm submission.
Pay here
Submit your application materials to the ISSC through theISSC eForm Portal(not to be confused with the SEVP Portal) NO MORE THAN 97 days prior to your program completion date.  ISSC will release your I-20 on or after the 90th day prior to your completion date.
Please have the following materials ready PRIOR to submitting the eForm:
Copy of biographical page of passport (page with your picture on it) valid at least six months into the future (NOT your visa).
Copy of recentI-94 arrival record(NOT your travel history).
Copy of recentI-94 arrival record(NOT your travel history).
Copy of the front and back of prior EAD cards at your current degree program level (if applicable).
Copy of $100OPT Case Management Paymentreceipt email notification (NOT a screenshot of your “cart”).The Case Management Payment must be paid by the student.If you are unable to use your own debit or credit card, you must include a written explanation of your circumstances along with your payment receipt. Please combine both the receipt and your letter of explanation into a single PDF file and upload it as one attachment to your eForm submission.
The Case Management Payment must be paid by the student.If you are unable to use your own debit or credit card, you must include a written explanation of your circumstances along with your payment receipt. Please combine both the receipt and your letter of explanation into a single PDF file and upload it as one attachment to your eForm submission.
Please allow the ISSC up to 10 days to process your Post-OPT request.
The ISSCcannotprocess your Post-OPT request untilAFTERyour academic advisor has approved your completion date. Any delay in your academic advisor’s approval isNOTpart of the ISSC’s 10-day processing time; please plan ahead.
USCIS will reject applications received prior to the 90th day before the student’s program end date. If the ISSC receives your eForm too early, your I-20 will be held and ready at or after the 90th day.
You will receive an email notification from the ISSC with your new Post-OPT I-20 and instructions.
If you would like a paper copy of your Post-OPT I-20, please review ourReceiving Documentswebpage for more information.
You must review the information within your I-20 for accuracy, then sign and date inblue ink.
Once the ISSC issues your I-20 with the Post-OPT recommendation, USCIS must receive your application within30 daysof the date your I-20 was issued. Remember, you also must apply before the end of your60-day grace period(the 60 days following your program end date).
Please Note:These deadlines are critical - applications received by USCIS more than 30 days after your I-20 was issued and/or after your 60-day grace periodwill be denied by USCIS. These time frames are counted by the day, not by the month. Remember, not all months have the same amount of days, so you must count out the specific days to make sure you are within the correct time frame. The ISSC recommends applying onlineat least the day beforethese deadlines to ensure your application is received by USCIS in time. The USCIS application portal does not have the same time zone as Arizona; therefore, depending on when you submit your application, it may be receipted by USCIS the next day.
USCIS recommends applying for Post-OPT through theirUSCIS online application portal.
For detailed instructions on completing the application with USCIS, please refer to theSelf-Guided Post-OPT Packet ReviewCanvas course.
Disclaimer:The information provided in the Canvas course is general guidance and should not be construed as formal legal advice. ISSC cannot guarantee the approval of your application to USCIS nor be held liable for the outcome of your application.
If you are interested in Premium Processing for your application, please visit theUSCIS Premium Processingwebpage for details. You can apply for premium processing along with your application to USCIS.
Review of Social Media:Please note that USCIS will review all applicants’ social media content as a part of the adjudication process. This could include anything you have posted, shared, reacted positively to, etc. Certain content may have a negative impact on your benefit request. Please see this April 9, 2025USCIS announcementfor more information as to what specific content may cause issues.
While your application is pending with USCIS
Please remember, USCIS processes and approves your application, NOT ASU. Therefore, you shouldcontact USCISregarding application issues and/or delays. USCIS cannot change requested start/end dates nor can they change your completion dates.
Once submitted, your requested dates cannot be changed. If you decide to not pursue your Post-OPT application, you may be able to withdraw your application before it has been processed. We recommend consulting with the ISSC before withdrawing your application.
If you will not graduate as planned, visit or contact ISSC immediately for further immigration advisement.
The average processing time for Post-OPT applications can vary. We recommend checking the USCIS website for currentprocessing times.
If your application is still processing after their currently posted processing times, you may submit acase inquiry with USCISregarding their delay in processing times.If you have not received an answer from USCIS within 30 days, you may submit acase assistance requestthrough the USCIS Ombudsman.
If you have not received an answer from USCIS within 30 days, you may submit acase assistance requestthrough the USCIS Ombudsman.
Changing your Address while your Application is Pending:
Changing your address while your Post OPT application is pending with USCIS may cause issues with your EAD card being mailed to you correctly. Even if you follow the procedures to update your address with USCIS, there is no guarantee that information will be processed by USCIS before the approval of your OPT application and your EAD card may still be mailed to your former address.
Therefore, it is recommended to avoid changing your address once your application is pending, if at all possible. If you know you will be moving while your application is pending, we recommend you put the mailing address of a reliable friend or family member on your application.
However, you must change your address while your application is pending, the United States Postal Service (USPS/ “the post office”) will not forward EAD cards. Therefore, to update your new address, do the following:
File anAR-11 online change of addressor update your address through yourmyUSCIS(preferred)
Update your Local Address throughMyASU.
Update your address withUSPS.
Note:You must update your address with the ISSC within 10 days of moving
Tips for Avoiding Application Rejections, Denials, Delays, and Receiving a Request for Evidence (RFE) from USCIS:
Do not submit your application to USCIS more than 90 days before the program end date as listed on your Post-OPT I-20.
USCIS must receive your application within 30 days of the date your I-20 was issued AND before the end of your 60-day grace period. The ISSC recommends applying onlineat least the day beforethese deadlines to ensure your application is received by USCIS in time. The USCIS application portal does not have the same time zone as Arizona; therefore, depending on when you submit your application, it may be receipted by USCIS the next day.Please Note:These deadlines are critical - applications received by USCIS more than 30 days after your Post OPT I-20 was issued and/or the end of your 60-day grace periodwill be denied by USCIS. This time frame is counted by the day, not by the month. Remember, not all months have the same amount of days, so you must count out the specific days to make sure you are within the correct time frame.If you will not be able to submit your application to USCIS within 30 days of receiving your I-20, you must request a new I-20 from the ISSC by completing theNew Post-OPT Recommendation Needed eForm.
Please Note:These deadlines are critical - applications received by USCIS more than 30 days after your Post OPT I-20 was issued and/or the end of your 60-day grace periodwill be denied by USCIS. This time frame is counted by the day, not by the month. Remember, not all months have the same amount of days, so you must count out the specific days to make sure you are within the correct time frame.
If you will not be able to submit your application to USCIS within 30 days of receiving your I-20, you must request a new I-20 from the ISSC by completing theNew Post-OPT Recommendation Needed eForm.
Print, sign and date your OPT I-20 in blue ink. Do not forget to upload your OPT I-20 as part of your USCIS application or it may result in a delay or denial.
If for any reason you receive a Rejection, Denial, or a Request for Evidence (RFE) Notice from USCIS, complete theOPT/STEM USCIS Notice UploadeForm for further advisement.
Maintaining Status
Reporting Employment Location
Students are required to report their employer address, as well as their physical location of work. The employer’s address can be the official address of the company, but the physical location of work should be where you are physically working. Some common examples are below:
SEVP Portal
The SEVP Portal is an important tool that lets F-1 students on post-completion optional practical training (OPT) meet their legal reporting requirements. Please visit the Create an Account page for specific instructions.
The SEVP Portal allows international students the ability to report address, telephone and employer information to SEVP without relying upon their designated school official (DSO) to update their information.
SEVP will email you with a link to set-up your SEVP Portal account. You will receive this email, to your ASU email address,within 72 hours of your EAD card start date.
The sender of the email will be[email protected].
There is no cost associated with creating an account or accessing the portal.
You must use your valid ASU email address.
SEVP Portal cannot be forwarded to a non-ASU email address.
If you are having trouble receiving emails from the SEVP Portal, please check your My ASU profile tab to ensure your ASU email is not set up to forward.
For more information, please visit theSEVP Portal Student User Guide web page.
FAQ
Each withdrawal situation is different. Therefore, to determine the right advisement you should joinDrop In Immigration Advisingimmediatelyso we can provide you further immigration advisement. The situation becomes critical as you approach the completion date listed on your I-20. Withdrawing is not always guaranteed. The USCIS filing fee is non-refundable.
You must visit or contact the ISSC immediately so we can provide you further immigration advisement. The situation becomes critical as you approach the completion date listed on your I-20.  Therefore, as soon as you suspect you will not complete your program of study you must contact the ISSC. This situation may have serious immigration consequences.
You are eligible for 12 months of OPT (Pre and Post) at each higher degree level. For example, if you have been granted OPT at the bachelor’s level previously, you will not have OPT available again at the bachelor’s level. Also, if you are pursuing dual majors at the same degree level (minors do not count), you will need to decide which major to use when applying for Post-OPT.
Yes, so long as the new employment is directly related to your field of study and you work a minimum of 20 hours per week. No special permission is required to change employers. Remember, you must update your employer information via theSEVP Portalwithin 10 days of the change.
Yes, you will do this via theSEVP Portal(not in My ASU). Once your OPT is approved and the start date is current, you will receive an email from[email protected]with directions on how to set up your SEVP Portal account. Check your SPAM and JUNK email folders if you do not receive this email once your Post-OPT is approved and the start date is current.
For more information on the SEVP Portal, please read throughhttps://studyinthestates.dhs.gov/sevp-portal-help
You will be mailed an invitation to create an SEVP portal account on the start date (valid from date) printed on your EAD card. It can take up to 72 hours from your start date to receive the email. If you did not receive an email from[email protected]with the subject line:Optional Practical Training Approval, please check the Spam folder in your ASU email account.
If you still cannot find the email, please do the following:
Go to theMyISSC eForm Portal.
Under F-1 Practical Training, submit theSEVP Portal IssueseForm.
The ISSC cannot process theSEVP Portal IssueseForm until you have submitted thePost-OPT EAD UploadeForm found under F-1 Practical Training in theMyISSC eForm Portal
After your eForm has been processed by theInternational Students and Scholars Center(ISSC), which may take up to 5 business days, SEVP will send an email containing the subject line: Optional Practical Training Approval - the next step. You are required to use your ASU email address as listed on My ASU to create your SEVP Portal account.
If your password is entered incorrectly 3 consecutive times or if you have not logged into your SEVP Portal account for 45 days or more, the account will be locked automatically. You should receive an email from SEVP containing the subject line: Your account has been locked for too many SEVIS ID validation failures. Please follow the instructions on that email.
If you did not receive this email, try to reset your password by the following steps:
Click on “Reset password,” then enter your ASU Public Email address (as listed on your My ASU Profile) and your SEVIS ID (It starts with N00 and is listed on your Form I-20) and click on “Update Password.”
Next, check your ASU email to see if you have received a temporary password and a link from the SEVP Portal. If not, check your Spam folder.
After following the link, enter the temporary password as the “current password,” and set a new password.
If resetting your password does not work, submit theSEVP Portal IssueseForm found in theMyISSC eForm Portalunder F-1 Practical Training.
There is no problem with breaking months in a Pre-OPT situation (separate filing fees apply); however, breaking Post-OPT time into different months is not recommended because the ISSC cannot guarantee that you will be granted use of the remaining months later.
As long as your application was received by USCIS, you are allowed to stay in the US until your application is adjudicated. You do not need to leave the US simply because your OPT was not approved within 90 days. Please visitUSCIS Case Status Onlineand enter your receipt number (YSC########) to monitor your application progress. CheckUSCIS processing timesto see how long they are taking on I-765 applications for Potomac, and if they are outside of their normal processing time, submit aCase Inquiry. Nevertheless, you cannot work, intern, or volunteer, and you should not travel until your application is adjudicated. If your OPT application has been approved you need to wait until your EAD card arrives (1-3 weeks after approval). You are NOT considered unemployed when your application is still pending.
No. You cannot start working until your application is approved, the start date is current, and you have your EAD card in-hand. This includes intern or volunteer work.
As long as your application was received by USCIS, you are allowed to stay in the US until your application is adjudicated.  You do not need to leave the US simply because your OPT was not approved within your 60-day grace period. Nevertheless, you cannot work, intern, or volunteer until your application is adjudicated.
If you accumulate 90 days or more of unemployment during Post-OPT, you are in violation of status and will be accumulating unlawful presence in the U.S. Please be prepared to depart or make other arrangements to keep your record free from unlawful presence accumulation. If you have a job offer that will start after your 90 days of unemployment, we do not suggest taking it since you will be accumulating unlawful presence.  A student may be denied future immigration benefits that rely on the student’s valid F-1 status if DHS determines that the student exceeded the limitations on unemployment.
If you have NOT mailed your application to USCIS, you can request a change of your OPT start date. Please visit the ISSC with your application for further instructions. However, if you HAVE mailed your application to USCIS, it is very difficult to change dates, which requires withdrawing your application, and may result in losing your Post-OPT benefit. Withdrawing the OPT application can be difficult and the fee is non-refundable. It can take up to 30 days for USCIS to respond to the withdraw request, and your application may be approved by then. Once OPT has been approved, no changes can be made.
You will remain in F-1 status while your application is adjudicated, during your Post-OPT and your 60-day grace period after OPT.
If you are authorized for Post-OPT, there are no employer or location restrictions; however, please choose a job that will have you work in the U.S., not in another country.  The job duties, not the job title or employer, must be related to your course of study.
Please see ourEAD Card Issueswebpage for information.
This simply means that you must carry other documents to show proof of your eligibility to re-enter the U.S. such as your I-20, passport and valid F-1 visa stamp. The EAD alone is not enough to re-enter the U.S.
No. Do not enter the U.S. on any visa other than F-1 or you will lose your F-1 status and your Post-OPT will be invalidated.
The primary purpose of Post-OPT/STEM is working.  Taking classes can be done as an incidental part of your stay.  Students are allowed to enroll in non-degree seeking classes. A full-time or degree-seeking program of study while on OPT/STEM is not allowed.
If you decide to go back to school full-time, you will need to request a forSEVIS transfer outfrom the ISSC to transfer your SEVIS Record and I-20 to the new school.
If you willstart a new degree program at ASU, you need to request a new degree I-20 from the ISSC before the new degree program start date or before the end of the 60-day grace period following the Post-OPT/STEM expiration date, whichever is earlier.
If you decide to transfer your record to another institution or pursue a new degree program, your Post-OPT/STEM will be invalidated once you receive the new degree I-20.
No, there are no extensions of Post-OPT unless you are STEM eligible.  After your OPT ends you have a 60-day grace period to either change your visa status, transfer to another school, pursue a new degree program at ASU, or return home.   You are not authorized to work during the grace period (unless you have a pending STEM OPT extension application).
Yes.  However, if you decide to pursue a new degree program, your Post-OPT/STEM will be invalidated once you receive the new degree I-20.  If you willstart a new degree program at ASU, you need to request a new degree I-20 from the ISSC before the new degree program start date or before the end of the 60-day grace period following the Post-OPT expiration date, whichever is earlier.
If you will start a new degree program at another institution, you have to request forSEVIS transfer outfrom the ISSC. This must be done before the end of the 60-day grace period following the Post-OPT expiration date.
You have a 60-day grace period after your Post-OPT/STEM ends to either change your visa status, transfer to another school, pursue a new degree program at ASU, or return home.  You are not authorized to work during this time (unless you have a pending STEM OPT extension application).
Changing your address while your Post OPT application is pending with USCIS may cause issues with your EAD card being mailed to you correctly. Even if you follow the procedures to update your address with USCIS, there is no guarantee that information will be processed by USCIS before the approval of your OPT application and your EAD card may still be mailed to your former address. Therefore it is recommended to avoid changing your address once your application is pending, if at all possible. If you know you will be moving while your application is pending, we recommend you put the mailing address of a reliable friend or family member on your application.
If you must change your address while your application is pending, you must do all of the following:
Update your address through yourMyUSCISaccount
Update your address withUSPS
Update your Local Address throughMyASU.
Note:You must update your address within 10 days of moving
Please see ourEAD Card Issueswebpage for information.
If your password is entered incorrectly 3 consecutive times or if you have not logged into your SEVP Portal account for 45 days or more, the account will be locked automatically. You should receive an email from SEVP containing the subject line: Your account has been locked for too many SEVIS ID validation failures. Please follow the instructions on that email.
If you did not receive this email, try to reset your password by the following steps:
Click on “Reset password,” then enter your ASU Public Email address (as listed on your My ASU Profile) and your SEVIS ID (It starts with N00 and can is listed on your Form I-20) and click on “Update Password.”
Next, check your ASU email to see if you have received a temporary password and a link from the SEVP Portal. If not, check your Spam folder.
After following the link, enter the temporary password as the “current password,” and set a new password.
If resetting your password does not work, submit theReporting SEVP Portal IssueseForm found in theMyISSC eForm Portalunder F-1 Practical Training.
You will be mailed an invitation to create an SEVP portal account on the start date (valid from date) printed on your EAD card. It can take up to 72 hours from your start date to receive the email. You will be unable to create an SEVP Portal account until you receive this email.
If you receive an error while trying to create an SEVP Portal account, please do the following:
Go to theMyISSC eForm Portal.
Under F-1 Practical Training, submit theSEVP Portal IssueseForm.
The ISSC cannot process theSEVP Portal IssueseForm until you have submitted thePost-OPT EAD UploadeForm found under F-1 Practical Training in theMyISSC eForm portal
Yes, they will, however, you will NOT provide USCIS with copies of their I-20s for your Post-OPT/STEM application. Only provide USCIS with your I-20.
Yes. You will be able to see the status of your application when you log into your USCIS online application. You can also use your Receipt Number from your USCIS I-797A Receipt Notice to check the status on theUSCIS Case Statustool.
The ISSC takes up to 7 days to process Post-OPT/STEM requests. Our processing times can vary due to caseload; therefore, cases cannot be expedited and will only be processed on a first-come, first-served basis. USCIS has an average processing time of 90 days; however, please visitUSCIS’s Processing Timeswebsite for their most up-to-date processing times. If you are interested in expedited processing from USCIS, please visit theirPremium Processingwebpage for details.
F-1/J-1 students