URL: https://issc.asu.edu/f-1j-1-students/employment/h1-b

Cap Gap to H-1B
On This Page:
Cap Gap to H-1B
A Cap-Gap extension is a regulatory provision which extends an eligible F-1 student's status to bridge the gap between the end of their F-1 Post-OPT/STEM OPT work authorization and the start of their cap subject H-1B status, allowing them to remain in the U.S. during the "gap."
The “cap-gap” period starts when an F-1 student’s status and employment authorization expires and, unless terminated, ends on April 1 of the fiscal year for which the H-1B status is being requested or until the validity start date of the approved petition, whichever is earlier.
Note:The Cap-Gap is not available for F-1 students whose H-1B application has been filed as Consular Processing or is Cap Exempt.
Eligibility
If you meet all of the following eligibility criteria, you may be entitled to an extension of F-1 status to cover the “cap gap” period:
You have properly maintained F-1 status
Your employment is subject to the H-1B cap
Your employer filed an H-1B petition for “Change of Status” (not “Consular Notification”) on or after April 1
Your F-1 status ends, including your 60-day grace period, between April 1 and the start date of your H-1B
Note:If your registration is selected in the lottery, this does not mean that you are eligible for the Cap Gap extension. Your sponsor should receive an I-797 notice of your selection, but they still need to file the H-1B petition in a timely manner in order for you to be eligible for the Cap-Gap extension.
There are two types of cap-gap extensions:
If the H-1B petition is filed for you during your 60-day grace period, you will receive a cap-gap extension of your F-1 status, but will not be authorized to work. This means you can remain in the U.S. in F-1 status during the cap-gap period but will not be eligible to work until USCIS approves the H-1B petition and your H-1B status begins.
If the H-1B petition is filed for you while you are on an active period of Post-OPT/STEM OPT, you will receive a cap-gap extension of your F-1 status and OPT authorization. This means you will be eligible to continue working on OPT until USCIS approves the H-1B petition and your H-1B status begins.
A student who is the beneficiary of areceiptedorapprovedH-1B petition will have their F-1 status automatically extended (if the cap-gap is needed). The cap-gap extension of status will continue until April 1 of the fiscal year for which such H-1B status is being requested or until the validity start date of the approved petition, whichever is earlier.
You are only eligible to apply for the cap-gap extension, once your H-1B petition is in pending or approved status with USCIS. If your registration is selected in the lottery, you are not eligible to apply for the cap-gap extension, until your H-1B petition has been filed and is pending with USCIS.
Note:Students who will continue to have valid Post-OPT/STEM OPT until their H-1B start date, do not need to apply for a cap-gap extension I-20 as they are not eligible (since it is not needed) for their situation.
How to apply
If you meet the eligibility criteria listed above, the cap-gap extension is automatic. You do not have to apply for a cap-gap extension. USCIS informs SEVIS of the H-1B application and the cap-gap is added to your SEVIS record.
After you have received the H-1B Receipt Notice or Approval Notice,you may request for a Cap-Gap Extension I-20.
How to Request a Cap-Gap I-20
Ensure that you have uploaded a copy of your EAD card through theISSC eForm Portalor link underMy ASUPriority Tasks.
Report or update your employment (if you have not done so) through theSEVP Portal(Post-OPT) or theISSC eForm Portal(STEM).
Ensure your current local address is listed in yourMy ASU.
Complete and submit theReplacement for I-20 eFormthrough theISSC eForm Portal.  Please have one of the following documents ready to upload:Receipt Notice (1-797C)orApproval Notice (I-797A)
Receipt Notice (1-797C)or
Approval Notice (I-797A)
ISSC will e-mail you when your Cap-Gap I-20 is ready. Our general processing time can take up to 7 business days. If you plan to travel during the cap-gap period, please consult with your employer/immigration lawyer as traveling or leaving the US might affect your H-1B application
Maintaining status
Maintaining status during Cap Gap extension
During your Cap Gap period, you are still required to maintain yourPost-OPTorSTEM OPT extensionstatus until your H-1B status begins.
It's your responsibility to report on time. Although you are set up to receive reminder emails, they may not work as designed. Please make sure you set reminders to report regularly.
Submitting your H-1B approval notice through theDemographic Update eForm will allowthe ISSC to update your SEVIS record.
10 days:Remember: Students must report to a DSO any changes in the student’s legal name, address, employer or employment status within 10 days of the change.
Please see the Optional Practical Training Priority Task link on My ASU to learn how to report these changes.
It is imperative to keep in touch with your employer's legal team regarding any changes that may affect your H-1B petition or approval.
If your H-1B petition is rejected, denied, withdrawn, or revoked, your cap-gap extension is immediately terminated. Most likely, you will be entitled to a 60-day grace period from the date of the USCIS notification. However, if the H-1B denial was due to a status violation, there is no grace period.
In some instances, if your H-1B status is revoked or withdrawn before the H-1B status start date, the ISSC may be able to request SEVP to reactivate your F-1 status. However, if you did not maintain your F-1 status and abide by all reporting requirements and regulations, you will not be eligible to have your F-1 status reactivated.
F-1/J-1 students