URL: https://issc.asu.edu/f-1j-1-students/employment/stem

STEM OPT
On This Page:
STEM OPT Extension
The 24-Month STEM OPT Extension is an additional benefit from United States Citizenship and Immigration Services (USCIS) that allows international students in F-1 status who receive a bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree in an approved STEM field to apply for a 24-month extension of their standard 12-month Post-OPT period, twice in a lifetime. This allows international students the opportunity to gain additional off-campus work experience in their field of study after completion of course studies and Post-OPT.
Eligibility
Requirements - Student
F-1 students must currently be participating in the 12-month Post-OPT, and working for a U.S. employer in a job directly related to their major area of study.
F-1 students must have earned a bachelor’s, master’s, or doctoral degree from a school that is accredited by a U.S. Department of Education-recognized accrediting agency and that is certified bythe Student and Exchange Visitor Program (SEVP)at the time you submit their STEM OPT extension application.
F1 students must have successfully completed a bachelor's, master’s, or doctoral degree in a STEM field included in theDHS STEM Designated Degree Program List. To find out if your program is in the DHS STEM Designated Degree Program list, look for the CIP code on your I-20 under the section entitled PROGRAM OF STUDY listed under MAJOR. You may also review thisdocumentwhich lists all ASU degree programs with CIP codes found on the DHS STEM Designated Degree Program List. You are responsible for confirming your program's eligibility at the time of application for OPT.
F-1 students may not engage in practical training for less than 20 hours per week during the STEM OPT extension period.
F-1 students may not engage in practical training that is unpaid/volunteer work or self-employment.
F-1 students may not be in a multiple employer arrangement, or employed by a sole proprietorship, through a temp agency, through a consulting firm arrangement that provides labor for hire, or other similar relationships, if such arrangements are not bona-fide employer-employee relationships. Students must ensure they are working with an employer that meets all employer requirements listed below and in the “STEM OPT Employer Requirements and Responsibilities” section of thisUSCIS webpage. 1099 arrangements do not meet the requirements for a bona-fide employer-employee relationship. We do not suggest you work in a 1099 arrangement on STEM OPT.
F-1 students must work with their employer to complete an individualized Training Plan for STEM OPT Students (Form I-983) which identifies goals for the STEM practical training opportunity, including specific knowledge, skills, or techniques that will be imparted to the F-1 student. The Form I-983 must explain how the training is directly related to the student’s qualifying STEM degree.
Previously obtained STEM degrees: If you are an F-1 student participating in a 12-month period of Post-OPT based on a non-STEM degree, you may be eligible to use a previous STEM degree from a U.S. institution of higher education to apply for a STEM OPT extension. You must have received both degrees from currently accredited and SEVP-certified institutions within the last 10 years, and cannot have already received a STEM OPT extension based on this previous degree. The practical training opportunity also must be directly related to the previously obtained STEM degree.
For example: If you are currently participating in OPT based on an MBA but you previously received a bachelor’s degree in mathematics, you may be able to apply for a STEM OPT extension based on this math degree as long as it is from an accredited U.S. college or university and the OPT employment opportunity is directly related to your degree in mathematics.
STEM degrees you obtain in the future: If you enroll in a new academic program in the future and earn another qualifying STEM degree at a higher educational level, you may be eligible for one additional 24-month STEM OPT extension.
For example: If you receive a 24-month STEM OPT extension based on your bachelor’s degree in engineering and you later earn a master’s degree in engineering, you may apply for an additional 24-month STEM OPT extension based on your master’s degree.
Requirements - Employer
Employer must be registered with theeVerify Employment Verification Systemand remain a participant in good standing with E-verify, as determined by USCIS.
Employer must have a valid Employer Identification Number (EIN) issued th the Internal Revenue Service for tax purposes
Employer must provide a practical training opportunity that is commensurate with those of similarly situated U.S. workers in duties, hours, and compensation.
Employer must implement a formal training program to augment the F-1 student’s academic learning through practical experience.
Employer must maintain a bona fide employer-employee relationship with the F-1 student.The employer that signs theForm I-983must be the same entity that provides the practical training experience to the student.The employer may not be the F-1 student’s employer in name only and may not assign, or otherwise delegate its training responsibilities to a non-employer third party (for example, a client or customer of the employer).
The employer that signs theForm I-983must be the same entity that provides the practical training experience to the student.
The employer may not be the F-1 student’s employer in name only and may not assign, or otherwise delegate its training responsibilities to a non-employer third party (for example, a client or customer of the employer).
Employer must report any material changes of the F-1 student’s employment by filling out a modifiedForm I-983.
If applicable, the employer must report the F-1 student’s termination of employment or departure to the Designated School Official (DSO) within 5 business days.
Note: F-1 students seeking STEM OPT extensions may be employed by new start-up businesses so long as all regulatory requirements listed above are met.
When to apply
To allow for the 7-day ISSC processing time and the 90-day USCIS processing time, ASU ISSC recommends applying for 24-Month STEM OPT no more than 97 days prior to end date of your Post-OPT. This will maximize your opportunity to receive your EAD card on time.
STEM extension applications must be received by USCIS before the end date listed on the Post-OPT EAD card or the STEM extension will be forfeited.
Students whose applications are received by USCIS before the EAD card expires will be able to continue employment while the extension application is pending until they receive the final decision from USCIS or for 180 days, whichever comes first.
How to apply
1. Submit the STEM OPT e-Form to ISSC
Submit your application materials to the ISSC through theISSC eForms Portal(not to be confused with the SEVP Portal) no more than 97 days prior to the end date listed on your Post-OPT EAD card.  The ISSC will release your I-20 on or after the 90th day prior to the end date listed on your EAD card.
Please have the following materials ready prior to submitting the e-Form:
Form I-983to be completed by you and your employer - digital/electronic signatures are allowed when signing the form.Forminstructions.The start date for the STEM OPT extension should be the day after your current 12‐month OPT ends.Pages 1 through 4 only.Please refer toISSC’s Self-Guided Form I-983 ReviewCanvas Course, theUnderstanding the I-983 videoand/or theForm I-983 overviewfor instructions on how to complete this form.If your canvas account has been deactivated, please email[email protected]with so we can place a ticket on your behalf.
Form I-983to be completed by you and your employer - digital/electronic signatures are allowed when signing the form.Forminstructions.The start date for the STEM OPT extension should be the day after your current 12‐month OPT ends.Pages 1 through 4 only.Please refer toISSC’s Self-Guided Form I-983 ReviewCanvas Course, theUnderstanding the I-983 videoand/or theForm I-983 overviewfor instructions on how to complete this form.
If your canvas account has been deactivated, please email[email protected]with so we can place a ticket on your behalf.
Copy of the biographical page of your passport (page with your picture on it) valid for at least six months into the future (NOT your visa).
Copy of your most recentI-94 arrival record(NOT your travel history).
Copy of the front and back of your prior EAD cards at your current degree program level.
Copy of $300OPT Case Management Paymentreceipt email notification (NOT a screenshot of your “cart”).The Case Management Payment must be paid by the student.If you are unable to use your own debit or credit card, you must include a written explanation of your circumstances along with your payment receipt. Please combine both the receipt and your letter of explanation into a single PDF file and upload it as one attachment to your eForm submission.
The Case Management Payment must be paid by the student.If you are unable to use your own debit or credit card, you must include a written explanation of your circumstances along with your payment receipt. Please combine both the receipt and your letter of explanation into a single PDF file and upload it as one attachment to your eForm submission.
2. Receive your 24-month STEM OPT Extension I-20 from the ISSC
You will receive an email notification from the ISSC with your new STEM OPT Extension I-20 and instructions attached.
If you would like a paper copy of your STEM OPT Extension I-20, please review ourReceiving Documentswebpage for more information.
USCIS will reject applications received prior to the 90th day before the student’s program end date. If the ISSC receives your eForm too early, your I-20 will be held and ready at or after the 90th day
3. Submit Application to USCIS for Processing
Once the ISSC issues your I-20 with the STEM OPT recommendation, USCIS must receive your application within60 daysof the date your I-20 was issued. Remember, you also must apply before your Post OPT end date.
Please Note:These deadlines are critical - applications received by USCIS more than 60 days after your I-20 was issued and/or after your Post OPT end datewill be denied by USCIS. These time frames are counted by the day, not by the month. Remember, not all months have the same amount of days, so you must count out the specific days to make sure you are within the correct time frame. The ISSC recommends applying onlineat least the day beforethese deadlines to ensure your application is received by USCIS in time. The USCIS application portal does not have the same time zone as Arizona; therefore, depending on when you submit your application, it may be receipted by USCIS the next day.
USCIS recommends applying for Post-OPT through theirUSCIS online application portal.
For detailed instructions on completing the application with USCIS, please refer to theSelf-Guided STEM OPT Packet ReviewCanvas course. If your canvas account has been deactivated, please email[email protected]with so we can place a ticket on your behalf.
Disclaimer:The information provided in the Canvas course is general guidance and should not be construed as formal legal advice. ISSC cannot guarantee the approval of your application to USCIS nor be held liable for the outcome of your application.
If you are interested in Premium Processing for your application, please visit theUSCIS Premium Processingwebpage for details. You can apply for premium processing along with your application to USCIS.
Review of Social Media:Please note that USCIS will review all applicants’ social media content as a part of the adjudication process. This could include anything you have posted, shared, reacted positively to, etc. Certain content may have a negative impact on your benefit request. Please see this April 9, 2025USCIS announcementfor more information as to what specific content may cause issues.
Tips for Avoiding Application Rejections, Denials, Delays, and Receiving a Request for Evidence (RFE) from USCIS:
Do not submit your application to USCIS more than 90 days before your Post OPT end date.
USCIS must receive your application within 60 days of the date your I-20 was issued AND before your Post OPT end date. The ISSC recommends applying onlineat least the day beforethese deadlines to ensure your application is received by USCIS in time. The USCIS application portal does not have the same time zone as Arizona; therefore, depending on when you submit your application, it may be receipted by USCIS the next day.Please Note:These deadlines are critical - applications received by USCIS more than 60 days after your I-20 was issued and/or after your Post OPT end datewill be denied by USCIS. This time frame is counted by the day, not by the month. Remember, not all months have the same amount of days, so you must count out the specific days to make sure you are within the correct time frame.If you will not be able to submit your application to USCIS within 60 days of receiving your I-20, you must request a new I-20 from the ISSC by emailing[email protected].
Please Note:These deadlines are critical - applications received by USCIS more than 60 days after your I-20 was issued and/or after your Post OPT end datewill be denied by USCIS. This time frame is counted by the day, not by the month. Remember, not all months have the same amount of days, so you must count out the specific days to make sure you are within the correct time frame.
If you will not be able to submit your application to USCIS within 60 days of receiving your I-20, you must request a new I-20 from the ISSC by emailing[email protected].
Print, sign and date your STEM OPT I-20 in blue ink. Do not forget to upload your STEM OPT I-20 or it may result in a delay or denial.
If for any reason you receive a Rejection, Denial, or a Request for Evidence (RFE) Notice from USCIS, complete theOPT/STEM USCIS Notice UploadeForm for further advisement.
While your application is pending with USCIS
Please remember, USCIS processes and approves your application, NOT ASU. Therefore, you shouldcontact USCISregarding application issues and/or delays. USCIS cannot change requested start/end dates nor can they change your completion dates.
If you decide to not pursue your STEM OPT application, you may be able to withdraw your application before it has been processed. We recommend consulting with the ISSC before withdrawing your application.
The average processing time for STEM OPT applications can vary. We recommend checking the USCIS website for currentprocessing times.
If your application is still processing after their currently posted processing times, you may submit acase inquiry with USCISregarding their delay in processing times.If you have not received an answer from USCIS within 30 days, you may submit acase assistance requestthrough the USCIS Ombudsman.
If you have not received an answer from USCIS within 30 days, you may submit acase assistance requestthrough the USCIS Ombudsman.
Changing Employer while STEM application is pending (and Post-OPT still active)
To avoid complications or delays with the STEM OPT Extension application, ISSC recommends that you do not travel or change employers while your STEM OPT Extension application is pending. If a change in employment is unavoidable, you must complete the following:
Log into your SEVP Portal account and update your current Post-OPT employmentCorrect your current employer’s end date.Input your new employer’s information.
Correct your current employer’s end date.
Input your new employer’s information.
Submit a form I-983 for the new STEM employer.Go to theMyISSC eForm Portal, click on F-1 Practical Training on the left side bar, click on 5. STEM OPT Extension: Reporting, and choose the STEM OPT Employment Update eFormFor the question “Is your STEM Extension application still pending with USCIS?” make sure to select “yes” and then choose the option of “Change to a new job – STEM OPT still pending” and complete and submit the eForm
Go to theMyISSC eForm Portal, click on F-1 Practical Training on the left side bar, click on 5. STEM OPT Extension: Reporting, and choose the STEM OPT Employment Update eForm
For the question “Is your STEM Extension application still pending with USCIS?” make sure to select “yes” and then choose the option of “Change to a new job – STEM OPT still pending” and complete and submit the eForm
Your SEVIS record will be updated to reflect the reported changes and an updated I-20 will be issued. To update USCIS with your change in employment, upload your new I-20 in the Unsolicited Evidence section of your STEM OPT application in the USCIS portal.
Changing Employer while STEM application is pending (and Post-OPT ended)
To avoid complications or delays with your STEM OPT Extension application, ISSC recommends that you do not travel or change employers while your STEM OPT Extension application is pending.  If a change in employment is unavoidable, you must complete the following:
Submit form I-983 for the new STEM employer.Go to theMyISSC eForm Portal, click on F-1 Practical Training on the left side bar, click on 5. STEM OPT Extension: Reporting, and choose the STEM OPT Employment Update eFormFor the question “Is your STEM Extension application still pending with USCIS?” make sure to select “yes” and then choose the option of “Change to a new job – STEM OPT still pending” and complete and submit the eForm
Go to theMyISSC eForm Portal, click on F-1 Practical Training on the left side bar, click on 5. STEM OPT Extension: Reporting, and choose the STEM OPT Employment Update eForm
For the question “Is your STEM Extension application still pending with USCIS?” make sure to select “yes” and then choose the option of “Change to a new job – STEM OPT still pending” and complete and submit the eForm
Your SEVIS record will be updated to reflect the reported changes and an updated I-20 will be issued. To update USCIS with your change in employment, upload your new I-20 in the Unsolicited Evidence section of your STEM OPT application in the USCIS portal along with a cover letter that includes information about your change in employment and the E-Verify number of your new employer.
Regulations during STEM OPT
While on the 24-month STEM OPT Extension, you are still in F-1 immigration status and must follow regulations in order to maintain your status.
Once your STEM OPT is approved and you have received your EAD card, make sure to upload a copy of your STEM OPT EAD card through the EAD Upload eForm in theMyISSC eForm portal.
6, 12, 18, and 24-month Reporting
While on STEM OPT, you are required to do reporting every 6 months. This is an important part of maintaining your F-1 status while on STEM OPT.
You will submit each report to the ISSC through theMyISSC eForm portal. You do not need to also call or email our office.
In the F-1 Practical Training section of the eForm portal, you will find the associated reporting eForms under “5. STEM OPT Extension: Reporting.”
Requirements for each reporting period are as follows:
6 months:Submit the 6-month reporting eForm - in the eForm you will confirm that your employment information is up to date.
12 months:Submit the 12-month reporting eForm - in the eForm you will confirm that your employment information is up to date AND upload the I-983 Pg. 5 Self-Evaluation (the top section of pg. 5).
18 months:Submit the 18-month reporting eForm - in the eForm you will confirm that your employment information is up to date
24 months:Submit the 24-month reporting eForm - in the eForm you will confirm that your employment information is up to date AND upload the I-983 Pg. 5 Final Evaluation (the bottom section of pg. 5).
For more details on the reporting requirements, please refer to ourForm I-983 Canvas Course.
Please note:You can submit each report up to 30 days before your 6-month deadline. Do not delay in submitting your request as the ISSC will not be able to expedite the processing of your request.
Updates in Employment Information
While on STEM OPT, you are limited in the information that you can update in the SEVP Portal. Employment updates, therefore, must be submitted through the STEM OPT Employment Update eForm in theMyISSC eForm portal. In the F-1 Practical Training section of the eForm portal, you will find the eForm under “5. STEM OPT Extension: Reporting.”
When reporting changes in employment, a new I-983 may be required. Here are examples of what changes you are required to report via the STEM OPT Employment Update eForm:
Ending a job - you will be required to upload a completed I-983 Pg. 5 Final Evaluation (the bottom section of pg. 5)
Starting a new job/adding an additional job - you will be required to upload a completed I-983 (pgs. 1-4)
Change in current employment information - the following will require you to upload an updated I-983 reflecting the changes:Change in employer name and/or EINChange in employer address and/or your working locationReduction in hoursReduction in compensation that is not tied to a reduction in hoursChange in job responsibilitiesChanges to the training plan/learning objectives as documented in the I-983
Change in employer name and/or EIN
Change in employer address and/or your working location
Reduction in hours
Reduction in compensation that is not tied to a reduction in hours
Change in job responsibilities
Changes to the training plan/learning objectives as documented in the I-983
Change in Supervisor - this depends on the situationIf your supervisor changes and the new supervisor will continue with the same training plan and your job responsibilities will not change, an updated I-983 is not required. You can update your supervisor information within the SEVP Portal.If the change in supervisor will result in an updated training plan and/or job responsibilities, you would need to submit an updated I-983. Please discuss this with your new supervisor.
If your supervisor changes and the new supervisor will continue with the same training plan and your job responsibilities will not change, an updated I-983 is not required. You can update your supervisor information within the SEVP Portal.
If the change in supervisor will result in an updated training plan and/or job responsibilities, you would need to submit an updated I-983. Please discuss this with your new supervisor.
Change in job title/role - this depends on the situationIf the change in job title/role does not impact your main job responsibilities and/or the training plan, an updated I-983 is not required. You can update your job title in the SEVP Portal.If the change in job title/role results in a change in your main job responsibilities and/or the training plan, you will need to submit an updated I-983. Please discuss this with your supervisor.
If the change in job title/role does not impact your main job responsibilities and/or the training plan, an updated I-983 is not required. You can update your job title in the SEVP Portal.
If the change in job title/role results in a change in your main job responsibilities and/or the training plan, you will need to submit an updated I-983. Please discuss this with your supervisor.
Multiple employers
Students may have multiple jobs while on STEM OPT, as long as all conditions of the STEM OPT employment criteria are met.
This means that each job must be related to your major area of study, at least 20 hours a week, with a company that participates in E-Verify, and it must be a paid position. Please read throughstudent and employer requirementsfor more details.
Unemployment
The rule states that during OPT, F-1 status is dependent upon employment. Students who are granted a 24-month extension are given an additional 60 days of unemployment for a total of 150 days over their entire Post-OPT and STEM periods. During any initial 12-month period of Post-OPT, no student may be unemployed for more than 90 days, and 150 days total during the STEM extension period. Unemployment dates are cumulative.
Unemployment starts accruing from your approved OPT/EAD start date (this is the date listed on your EAD card) but you are not working.
If you accumulate 150 days or more of unemployment, you are in violation of your F-1 status. You are expected to leave the U.S., transfer to another school or change your visa status before the 150th day.
If you have a job offer that will start after your 150 days of unemployment, we do not suggest taking it since you will be accumulating unlawful presence.  A student may be denied future immigration benefits that rely on the student’s valid F-1 status if DHS determines that the student exceeded the limitations on unemployment.
Approved vacation from a job does not count as "unemployment" if you are still considered an employee there.
Jobs that are less than 20 hours per week are not permitted on STEM OPT. If you work less than 20 hours a week, it will count as unemployment time.
Early Completion of the 24-month STEM OPT and Leaving the U.S., or Change of Status
If you left the United States, submit theF-1 Demographic UpdateeForm through the ISSC eForm Portal with proof of leaving the US such as; the travel history page of your I-94, or the air tickets.  We will then complete your records. This update will invalidate your STEM OPT employment authorization, and your I-20 and EAD card will no longer be valid.
If you change your visa status before your STEM OPT expiration date, submit theF-1 Demographic UpdateeForm through the ISSC eForm Portal and upload form I-797A Approval Notice or other evidence you have received a new visa status.
In both of these situations, you must also submit theSTEM OPT Employment UpdateeForm in order to do your final STEM OPT reporting. This is required in order to meet the final reporting requirements; you will be asked to upload the I-983 final evaluation as a part of the eForm.
Frequently asked questions
If you are authorized for Post-OPT, there are no employer or location restrictions; however, please choose a job that will have you work in the U.S., not in another country.  The job duties, not the job title or employer, must be related to your course of study.
Please see ourEAD Card Issueswebpage for information.
This simply means that you must carry other documents to show proof of your eligibility to re-enter the U.S. such as your I-20, passport and valid F-1 visa stamp. The EAD alone is not enough to re-enter the U.S.
No. If you enter the U.S. on any visa other than F-1, you will lose your F-1 status and your STEM OPT will be invalidated.
The primary purpose of Post-OPT/STEM is working.  Taking classes can be done as an incidental part of your stay.  Students are allowed to enroll in non-degree seeking classes. A full-time or degree-seeking program of study while on OPT/STEM is not allowed.
If you decide to go back to school full-time, you will need to request a forSEVIS transfer outfrom the ISSC to transfer your SEVIS Record and I-20 to the new school.
If you willstart a new degree program at ASU, you need to request a new degree I-20 from the ISSC before the new degree program start date or before the end of the 60-day grace period following the Post-OPT/STEM expiration date, whichever is earlier.
If you decide to transfer your record to another institution or pursue a new degree program, your Post-OPT/STEM will be invalidated once you receive the new degree I-20.
Yes.  However, if you decide to pursue a new degree program, your Post-OPT/STEM will be invalidated once you receive the new degree I-20.  If you willstart a new degree program at ASU, you need to request a new degree I-20 from the ISSC before the new degree program start date or before the end of the 60-day grace period following the Post-OPT expiration date, whichever is earlier.
If you will start a new degree program at another institution, you have to request forSEVIS transfer outfrom the ISSC. This must be done before the end of the 60-day grace period following the Post-OPT expiration date.
You have a 60-day grace period after your Post-OPT/STEM ends to either change your visa status, transfer to another school, pursue a new degree program at ASU, or return home.  You are not authorized to work during this time (unless you have a pending STEM OPT extension application).
Changing your address while your STEM OPT application is pending with USCIS may cause issues with your EAD card being mailed to you correctly. Even if you follow the procedures to update your address with USCIS, there is no guarantee that information will be processed by USCIS before the approval of your STEM OPT application and your EAD card may still be mailed to your former address. Therefore it is recommended to avoid changing your address once your application is pending, if at all possible. If you know you will be moving while your application is pending, we recommend you put the mailing address of a reliable friend or family member on your application.
If you must change your address while your application is pending, you must do all of the following:
Update your address through yourMyUSCISaccount
Update your address withUSPS
Update your Local Address throughMyASU.
Note:You must update your address within 10 days of moving
Please see ourEAD Card Issueswebpage for information.
If your password is entered incorrectly 3 consecutive times or if you have not logged into your SEVP Portal account for 45 days or more, the account will be locked automatically. You should receive an email from SEVP containing the subject line:Your account has been locked for too many SEVIS ID validation failures. Please follow the instructions on that email.
If you did not receive this email, try to reset your password by the following steps:
Click on “Reset password,” then enter your ASU Public Email address (as listed on your My ASU Profile) and your SEVIS ID (It starts with N00 and can is listed on your Form I-20) and click on “Update Password.”
Next, check your ASU email to see if you have received a temporary password and a link from the SEVP Portal. If not, check your Spam folder.
After following the link, enter the temporary password as the “current password,” and set a new password.
If resetting your password does not work, submit theSEVP Portal IssueseForm found in theMyISSC eForm portalunder F-1 Practical Training.
Yes, they will, however, you will NOT provide USCIS with copies of their I-20s for your Post-OPT/STEM application. Only provide USCIS with your I-20.
Yes. You will be able to see the status of your application when you log into your USCIS online application. You can also use your Receipt Number from your USCIS I-797A Receipt Notice to check the status on theUSCIS Case Statustool.
The ISSC takes up to 7 days to process Post-OPT/STEM request. Our processing times can vary due to case load; therefore, cases cannot be expedited and will only be processed on a first come, first served basis, respectively. USCIS has an average processing time of 90 days; however, please visitUSCIS’s Processing Timeswebsite for their most up-to-date processing times. If you are interested in expedited processing from USCIS, please visit theirPremium Processingwebpage for details.
F-1/J-1 students