URL: https://global.utexas.edu/isss/immigration/f-1/employment/post-completion-opt

Post-Completion Optional Practical Training
Post-Completion Optional Practical Training (OPT) is temporary employment authorization approved by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services that students can use after they have completed their degree. Employment on Post-Completion OPT must relate directly to a student’s major field of study.
Fast Facts about Post-Completion OPTPlan early! OPT can take 3 to 5 months (sometimes even longer) to obtain.You don't need a job offer to apply for Post-Completion OPT.You need to be in valid F-1 status.You must have completed two consecutive long semesters at UT to be eligible to apply.You may apply for Post-Completion OPT as early as 90 days before your graduation date or as late as 60 days after your graduation date.You must be physically present in the U.S. to apply for OPT.Students who finish all coursework required for graduation and plan to enroll in absentia for the following semester must apply for OPT in the final semester of their coursework (not the semester of in absentia graduation).AnOPT Administrative Feeof $150 for Post-Completion OPT is charged once a student has completed the OPT workshop and is eligible to apply for Post-Completion OPT.While engaged in Post-Completion OPT, you are still in F-1 student status.To maintain your status, you cannot accumulate more than 90 days of unemployment from the start date listed on your EAD card.You must continue to report any change in employmentin the SEVP Portaland any change of physical address or email addressthrough MyUTwithin 10 days to maintain your F-1 status.
Plan early! OPT can take 3 to 5 months (sometimes even longer) to obtain.
You don't need a job offer to apply for Post-Completion OPT.
You need to be in valid F-1 status.
You must have completed two consecutive long semesters at UT to be eligible to apply.
You may apply for Post-Completion OPT as early as 90 days before your graduation date or as late as 60 days after your graduation date.
You must be physically present in the U.S. to apply for OPT.
Students who finish all coursework required for graduation and plan to enroll in absentia for the following semester must apply for OPT in the final semester of their coursework (not the semester of in absentia graduation).
AnOPT Administrative Feeof $150 for Post-Completion OPT is charged once a student has completed the OPT workshop and is eligible to apply for Post-Completion OPT.
While engaged in Post-Completion OPT, you are still in F-1 student status.
To maintain your status, you cannot accumulate more than 90 days of unemployment from the start date listed on your EAD card.
You must continue to report any change in employmentin the SEVP Portaland any change of physical address or email addressthrough MyUTwithin 10 days to maintain your F-1 status.
Required OPT WorkshopAt UT, youmustcomplete an OPT Workshop before you may apply for post-completion OPT.During the workshop you will learn:General information about OPTThe application timeline and considerationsDetailed instructions on how to prepare a successful applicationYour immigration responsibilities while you're using OPTInformation about traveling while on OPTYou can complete the OPT Workshop online inmyIO. You can also access the OPT Workshop materials here:Module 1:OPT OverviewModule 2:When to Apply for OPTModule 3:How to Apply for OPTModule 4:While OPT is PendingModule 5:After OPT is Approved
At UT, youmustcomplete an OPT Workshop before you may apply for post-completion OPT.
During the workshop you will learn:
General information about OPT
The application timeline and considerations
Detailed instructions on how to prepare a successful application
Your immigration responsibilities while you're using OPT
Information about traveling while on OPT
You can complete the OPT Workshop online inmyIO. You can also access the OPT Workshop materials here:
Module 1:OPT Overview
Module 2:When to Apply for OPT
Module 3:How to Apply for OPT
Module 4:While OPT is Pending
Module 5:After OPT is Approved
Applying for OPTComplete the OPT Workshop online throughmyIO.Charge and pay the OPT Administrative Fee.Submit the OPT Request online inmyIO.Receive your OPT I-20 from ISSS.Apply to USCIS. You MUST include your OPT I-20 (with OPT recommendation on page 2) in your application to USCIS, whether you apply by mail or online. See more information about online filing under “OPT Frequently Asked Questions.”
Complete the OPT Workshop online throughmyIO.
Charge and pay the OPT Administrative Fee.
Submit the OPT Request online inmyIO.
Receive your OPT I-20 from ISSS.
Apply to USCIS. You MUST include your OPT I-20 (with OPT recommendation on page 2) in your application to USCIS, whether you apply by mail or online. See more information about online filing under “OPT Frequently Asked Questions.”
Report OPT Employment
Please report your OPT employment or volunteer work within 10 days of your start date and anytime there is a change. Reporting your employment is important because the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) must verify that you are employed and not in violation of the 90-day unemployment rule. You can update your employment details directly to your SEVIS record through the SEVP Portal. Personal contact information should be updated inMyUT.
Upload EAD
Once your OPT is approved and your EAD card arrives, upload a copy for ISSS to review. This is an important step because it allows ISSS to review important details in your immigration record and make any corrections if necessary.
OPT Reporting
Employment information to reportAny time there is a change to your employment, report the change directly to your SEVIS record using the SEVP Portal. You will receive an email with instructions on creating a portal account once your OPT is approved. This email will come fromdo-not-reply.sevp@ice.dhs.gov. If you do not see the email, check your spam or junk mail folder. If you still do not see it, contacthotline@austin.utexas.eduto have the email sent again. SEVP has created anSEVP Portal Help pagewith instructions on using the portal. If you have any questions about the portal or need assistance, call the SEVP Response Center at 703-603-3400.
Any time there is a change to your employment, report the change directly to your SEVIS record using the SEVP Portal. You will receive an email with instructions on creating a portal account once your OPT is approved. This email will come fromdo-not-reply.sevp@ice.dhs.gov. If you do not see the email, check your spam or junk mail folder. If you still do not see it, contacthotline@austin.utexas.eduto have the email sent again. SEVP has created anSEVP Portal Help pagewith instructions on using the portal. If you have any questions about the portal or need assistance, call the SEVP Response Center at 703-603-3400.
Change of home address, email address, and phone numberMake sure that your contact information is up-to-date inMyUT/UT Direct. When you update MyUT, changes will automatically be made to your SEVIS record. If you update your information in the SEVP Portal only, it will not update your UT record.
Make sure that your contact information is up-to-date inMyUT/UT Direct. When you update MyUT, changes will automatically be made to your SEVIS record. If you update your information in the SEVP Portal only, it will not update your UT record.
Change your immigration statusIf you change your immigration status,upload in myIOa copy of your Change of Status Approval Notice. An international student advisor will review your information to confirm that USCIS appropriately completed your record.
If you change your immigration status,upload in myIOa copy of your Change of Status Approval Notice. An international student advisor will review your information to confirm that USCIS appropriately completed your record.
Moving back to home countryIf you decide to depart the U.S. and not use your OPT authorization, complete the Early Completion of OPT form in your myIO OPT checklistafteryou have departed the U.S. An international student advisor will complete your SEVIS record and report your departure from the United States.
If you decide to depart the U.S. and not use your OPT authorization, complete the Early Completion of OPT form in your myIO OPT checklistafteryou have departed the U.S. An international student advisor will complete your SEVIS record and report your departure from the United States.
OPT Frequently Asked Questions
Can I file my OPT application online?Yes! ISSS strongly recommends e-filing over mailing a paper application. ISSS only provides published instructions for e-filing your OPT application.CAUTION: If you choose to file your I-765 application online, you must first receive an OPT I-20 from ISSS, showing an OPT recommendation on page 2,beforebeginning the online filing process. The OPT I-20 is an essential part of the application; without it, your application will be denied.
Yes! ISSS strongly recommends e-filing over mailing a paper application. ISSS only provides published instructions for e-filing your OPT application.
CAUTION: If you choose to file your I-765 application online, you must first receive an OPT I-20 from ISSS, showing an OPT recommendation on page 2,beforebeginning the online filing process. The OPT I-20 is an essential part of the application; without it, your application will be denied.
What should I do if I have a problem with my OPT application?If there is an error on your Receipt Notice or EAD:Contact USCISdirectly to request a correction if there is an error in your date of birth, name, or EAD dates. If you have any questions about this, pleaseschedule an appointmentto speak with an international student advisor.If you receive a Request for Evidence (RFE):Pleaseschedule an advising appointmentas soon as possible to review the RFE with an international student advisor. Responding to an RFE is time-sensitive. If you cannot find an appointment soon, please emailhotline@austin.utexas.edu.If your Notice or EAD is lost in the mail:Check your case statusonline regularly once you have a receipt number to see if USCIS mails you anything related to this application.Submit an inquirywith USCIS online if something is not delivered to the address you indicated on the application.Contacting U.S. Citizenship & Immigration Services (USCIS):A ticket is opened each time you contact USCIS. Contacting USCIS multiple times could cause delays and slow down your case.Only the applicant can contact USCIS about the case. USCIS will not accept calls from ISSS staff.If you are not sure whether or not it is appropriate to contact USCIS, please feel free to check with ISSS first.Track your case status >Submit an online case inquiry with USCIS >Call USCIS National Customer Service Center: 1-800-375-5283
If there is an error on your Receipt Notice or EAD:
Contact USCISdirectly to request a correction if there is an error in your date of birth, name, or EAD dates. If you have any questions about this, pleaseschedule an appointmentto speak with an international student advisor.
If you receive a Request for Evidence (RFE):
Pleaseschedule an advising appointmentas soon as possible to review the RFE with an international student advisor. Responding to an RFE is time-sensitive. If you cannot find an appointment soon, please emailhotline@austin.utexas.edu.
If your Notice or EAD is lost in the mail:
Check your case statusonline regularly once you have a receipt number to see if USCIS mails you anything related to this application.
Submit an inquirywith USCIS online if something is not delivered to the address you indicated on the application.
Contacting U.S. Citizenship & Immigration Services (USCIS):
A ticket is opened each time you contact USCIS. Contacting USCIS multiple times could cause delays and slow down your case.
Only the applicant can contact USCIS about the case. USCIS will not accept calls from ISSS staff.
If you are not sure whether or not it is appropriate to contact USCIS, please feel free to check with ISSS first.
Track your case status >Submit an online case inquiry with USCIS >Call USCIS National Customer Service Center: 1-800-375-5283
Do I have to be in the United States when I apply for OPT?Yes. You must be physically present in the United States when you apply for OPT and when USCIS receives your application.
Yes. You must be physically present in the United States when you apply for OPT and when USCIS receives your application.
I've submitted my OPT application before graduating. Can I travel outside the U.S., while I wait to receive the EAD card?If you have an OPT application pending with USCIS and have not yet graduated, you can travel as you normally would as an F-1 student. For instance, if you applied for OPT in May, are enrolled during the summer, and will graduate in August, you may still travel as a student until your I-20 end date. It is important to note that re-entry to the U.S. immediately before your official graduation date carries an increased risk of denial of entry.
If you have an OPT application pending with USCIS and have not yet graduated, you can travel as you normally would as an F-1 student. For instance, if you applied for OPT in May, are enrolled during the summer, and will graduate in August, you may still travel as a student until your I-20 end date. It is important to note that re-entry to the U.S. immediately before your official graduation date carries an increased risk of denial of entry.
What if I have to travel out of the country after graduation while my OPT application is still pending?Texas Global does not recommend international travel after graduation while your OPT application is pending. Traveling during this period can jeopardize the approval of your application. We recommenddiscussing your travel plans with an international student advisorbefore departing the U.S.If you depart the U.S. after graduating and your OPT application is approved, you will need to make arrangements with a friend or family member to have your EAD card mailed to you. USCIS does not forward EAD cards, so it is very important to provide a valid U.S. mailing address on your application.
Texas Global does not recommend international travel after graduation while your OPT application is pending. Traveling during this period can jeopardize the approval of your application. We recommenddiscussing your travel plans with an international student advisorbefore departing the U.S.
If you depart the U.S. after graduating and your OPT application is approved, you will need to make arrangements with a friend or family member to have your EAD card mailed to you. USCIS does not forward EAD cards, so it is very important to provide a valid U.S. mailing address on your application.
What documents do I need to re-enter the U.S. while on OPT?Original I-20 with OPT recommendation.The travel signature/endorsement is valid for 6 months from the date of signature while you are on OPT. This is different from when you were an enrolled student and the travel signature was valid for 12 months.Employment Authorization Document (EAD card) from USCISProof of employmentfrom your employer that includes the dates of your employment, a description of your duties, your salary, location where you will be working, and number of hours of work per week. You should also be prepared to discuss how this job experience relates to your major field of study. If your employer is sponsoring you for a work visa, this information should not be included in your letter for travel while on OPT. Any mention of plans to change visa statuses could be interpreted as a misrepresentation of your intentions in the U.S. by a Port of Entry Officer. A volunteer position letter is acceptable.Valid F-1 visa.Do not use other types of U.S. visas (i.e. tourist visa or visa waiver) if you plan to use OPT upon your return to the U.S.Valid passportSEVIS Fee Receipt
Original I-20 with OPT recommendation.The travel signature/endorsement is valid for 6 months from the date of signature while you are on OPT. This is different from when you were an enrolled student and the travel signature was valid for 12 months.
Employment Authorization Document (EAD card) from USCIS
Proof of employmentfrom your employer that includes the dates of your employment, a description of your duties, your salary, location where you will be working, and number of hours of work per week. You should also be prepared to discuss how this job experience relates to your major field of study. If your employer is sponsoring you for a work visa, this information should not be included in your letter for travel while on OPT. Any mention of plans to change visa statuses could be interpreted as a misrepresentation of your intentions in the U.S. by a Port of Entry Officer. A volunteer position letter is acceptable.
Valid F-1 visa.Do not use other types of U.S. visas (i.e. tourist visa or visa waiver) if you plan to use OPT upon your return to the U.S.
Valid passport
SEVIS Fee Receipt
The F-1 visa stamp in my passport has expired, but I need to travel outside the U.S. while on OPT. Do I need to get a new visa stamp at an embassy?If you are going to Canada or Mexico or other contiguous territories (except for Cuba) and staying for less than 30 days, you can re-enter the U.S. on your expired F-1 visa stamp, a valid passport, EAD card, and an I-20 with a valid travel signature. This process is called Automatic Visa Revalidation (AVR). Tell the immigration official at the port of exit (border) that you intend to stay outside the U.S. for less than 30 days and that your U.S. visa is expired. Make sure to have all your documents before you travel and present those documents to reenter the U.S. Additional details about AVR can be found on ourKnow Before You Travelpage.If you are traveling elsewhere and your F-1 visa is expired, you must visit a U.S. embassy or consulate to apply for a new F-1 visa. Please reference ourApplying for a U.S. Visa pagefor more information on the visa renewal process. In addition to the documents listed on the Visa Information page, you will also need to bring your EAD card and employment letter with you to the visa appointment.
If you are going to Canada or Mexico or other contiguous territories (except for Cuba) and staying for less than 30 days, you can re-enter the U.S. on your expired F-1 visa stamp, a valid passport, EAD card, and an I-20 with a valid travel signature. This process is called Automatic Visa Revalidation (AVR). Tell the immigration official at the port of exit (border) that you intend to stay outside the U.S. for less than 30 days and that your U.S. visa is expired. Make sure to have all your documents before you travel and present those documents to reenter the U.S. Additional details about AVR can be found on ourKnow Before You Travelpage.
If you are traveling elsewhere and your F-1 visa is expired, you must visit a U.S. embassy or consulate to apply for a new F-1 visa. Please reference ourApplying for a U.S. Visa pagefor more information on the visa renewal process. In addition to the documents listed on the Visa Information page, you will also need to bring your EAD card and employment letter with you to the visa appointment.
In what ways is my application to the embassy for a new visa stamp affected by being on post-completion Optional Practical Training?Many UT students successfully travel and renew their F-1 visas while on OPT. However, the risk of denial for an F-1 visa renewal while on OPT is slightly higher than when you are enrolled in an academic program. As the F-1 student visa requires applicants have intentions to return to their home country upon completing their academic program, the visa application could be denied if the embassy official is not convinced of your intention to return home.During your visa appointment it is important to demonstrate that your intent still matches the purpose of the non-immigrant F-1 student visa category. Be prepared to answer how your stay in the United States is temporary and be prepared to demonstrate that you do not intend to immigrate to the United States. You can do this by showing strong ties to your home country, such as family, property, or employment waiting for your return. Evidence can often be subjective, so use your best judgment to decide what documents you want to take with you to your visa appointment.
Many UT students successfully travel and renew their F-1 visas while on OPT. However, the risk of denial for an F-1 visa renewal while on OPT is slightly higher than when you are enrolled in an academic program. As the F-1 student visa requires applicants have intentions to return to their home country upon completing their academic program, the visa application could be denied if the embassy official is not convinced of your intention to return home.
During your visa appointment it is important to demonstrate that your intent still matches the purpose of the non-immigrant F-1 student visa category. Be prepared to answer how your stay in the United States is temporary and be prepared to demonstrate that you do not intend to immigrate to the United States. You can do this by showing strong ties to your home country, such as family, property, or employment waiting for your return. Evidence can often be subjective, so use your best judgment to decide what documents you want to take with you to your visa appointment.
Can I travel while on OPT if I have applied for an H-1B visa?Please consult an Immigration Attorney for guidance regarding international travel if you plan to pursue the H-1B process, have an H-1B petition pending with USCIS, or have an I-797 H-1B approval notice.
Please consult an Immigration Attorney for guidance regarding international travel if you plan to pursue the H-1B process, have an H-1B petition pending with USCIS, or have an I-797 H-1B approval notice.
How do I get a travel signature while on OPT?For international travel, the travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 should be less than 6 months old by the date of your return to the U.S.If you need an updated travel signature, please completethe I-20 Travel Signature Request form in myIO.
For international travel, the travel signature on page 2 of your I-20 should be less than 6 months old by the date of your return to the U.S.
If you need an updated travel signature, please completethe I-20 Travel Signature Request form in myIO.
Still have questions?
International Student Advisors are available to assist you while you are on OPT. For general questions or requests, please emailhotline@austin.utexas.edu. For non-general inquires, pleaseschedule an appointmentto speak with an international student advisor. Please keep in mind that international student advisors are trained in student visa topics. For information on employer-sponsored visas or residency applications, please consult with your employer's representative or a qualifiedimmigration attorney.
Curricular Practical TrainingEconomic Hardship EmploymentPost-Completion Optional Practical TrainingPre-Completion Optional Practical TrainingSTEM Optional Practical Training
Curricular Practical Training
Economic Hardship Employment
Post-Completion Optional Practical Training
Pre-Completion Optional Practical Training
STEM Optional Practical Training