URL: https://global.utexas.edu/isss/immigration/f-1/employment/pre-completion-opt

Pre-Completion Optional Practical Training
Pre-Completion Optional Practical Training (OPT) is temporary employment authorization issued by U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services that can be used while you are a current student at UT. Employment must relate directly to your major field of study. Pre-Completion OPT may be an option for students who are not eligible to useCurricular Practical Training, or CPT, while they are enrolled as a student at UT.
Fast Facts about Pre-Completion OPT
Plan early! OPT can take three to five months to obtain.
You may apply for Pre-Completion OPT as early as 90 days before your requested start date.
You don't need a job offer to apply for Pre-Completion OPT.
You need to be in valid F-1 status.
You must have completed two consecutive long semesters at UT to be eligible to apply.
Most students can only work up to 20 hours per week during the long semesters.
The 90-day unemployment rule does not apply to Pre-Completion OPT.
Days of approved Pre-completion OPT will reduce the number of days available for future Pre-completion or Post-completion OPT.
Most students will useCPTinstead of Pre-Completion OPT to work before graduation.
Applying for Pre-Completion OPT
Step 1: Read thePre-completion OPT Guidein full.
Step 2: Submit your request for a Pre-completion OPT I-20 throughmyIO.
For detailed instructions, see thePre-completion OPT Guide.
Step 3: File the I-765 Application for Employment Authorization with USCIS.
For detailed instructions, see thePre-completion OPT Guide.
Report Pre-Completion OPT Employment
Please report your Pre-Completion OPT employment within 10 days of your start date and any time there is a change. Reporting your employment is a requirement of your OPT authorization. You can report your employment by completing thePre-Completion OPT Employment Report formin myIO.
Upload EAD
Once your OPT is approved and your EAD card arrives, upload a copy (front and back) tomyIOfor ISSS to review. This is an important step because it allows ISSS to review important details in your immigration record and make any corrections if necessary.
Frequently Asked Questions
What is the difference between Pre-Completion OPT and Curricular Practical Training (CPT)?F-1 students looking to gain professional experience during their studies at UT have the option of either using Pre-Completion OPT or Curricular Practical Training (CPT). The majority of students will use CPT instead of Pre-Completion OPT. The table below provides an overview of the main differences between the two. You can find additional information about CPT on theCPT page.Pre-Completion OPTCPTApproval Process:Approved by USCISApproved by an International Student Advisor in ISSSCosts:Application Fee to USCIS (See “Filing Fee” on the USCIS I-765 page for the exact amount).No additional costsProcessing Time:3 to 5 months or more to receive a response from USCISCPT requests are usually processed within 10 business days of getting academic approval from the department.Academic Requirements:Positions must be related to your major. No internship course or internship degree requirement is needed.Positions must be related to your major. Work must be required for an internship course, the completion of your dissertation or thesis, or a degree requirement.Hour limit on employment:Part-time (20 hours) while taking coursesPart-time or Full-time
F-1 students looking to gain professional experience during their studies at UT have the option of either using Pre-Completion OPT or Curricular Practical Training (CPT). The majority of students will use CPT instead of Pre-Completion OPT. The table below provides an overview of the main differences between the two. You can find additional information about CPT on theCPT page.
Can I work part-time or full-time while on Pre-Completion OPT?When applying for Pre-Completion OPT, you will need to choose between part-time and full-time Pre-Completion OPT. Part-time Pre-Completion OPT allows you to work up to 20 hours per week. Full-time Pre-Completion OPT allows you to work more than 20 hours per week.If you request Pre-Completion OPT for a period that includes both regular long semester dates and school break dates, the limit to part-time Pre-Completion OPT will apply to the whole period you are approved for OPT by USCIS. To take advantage of the full-time hours during summer or school break, you will need to make a separate Pre-Completion OPT application for the summer or school break dates.
When applying for Pre-Completion OPT, you will need to choose between part-time and full-time Pre-Completion OPT. Part-time Pre-Completion OPT allows you to work up to 20 hours per week. Full-time Pre-Completion OPT allows you to work more than 20 hours per week.
If you request Pre-Completion OPT for a period that includes both regular long semester dates and school break dates, the limit to part-time Pre-Completion OPT will apply to the whole period you are approved for OPT by USCIS. To take advantage of the full-time hours during summer or school break, you will need to make a separate Pre-Completion OPT application for the summer or school break dates.
Does using Pre-Completion OPT affect my ability to use Post-Completion OPT and STEM OPT?Any time used on Pre-Completion OPT takes away from the time that you have available for future OPT requests. Every day of part-time or full-time Pre-Completion OPT takes away 1 day that would be available for future pre- or post-completion OPT. Two months of Pre-Completion OPT reduces your available OPT time by two months. Every day of OPT that you are approved for is considered used even if you do not work every day that you are authorized for. You will lose time from your total amount of available OPT even if you do not work on Pre-Completion OPT.If you are eligible forSTEM OPT, remember that it is an extension of your Post-Completion OPT. Therefore, you must have OPT time to apply for Post-Completion OPT to apply for STEM OPT. Your post-completion also needs to be approved before you can apply for STEM OPT.
Any time used on Pre-Completion OPT takes away from the time that you have available for future OPT requests. Every day of part-time or full-time Pre-Completion OPT takes away 1 day that would be available for future pre- or post-completion OPT. Two months of Pre-Completion OPT reduces your available OPT time by two months. Every day of OPT that you are approved for is considered used even if you do not work every day that you are authorized for. You will lose time from your total amount of available OPT even if you do not work on Pre-Completion OPT.
If you are eligible forSTEM OPT, remember that it is an extension of your Post-Completion OPT. Therefore, you must have OPT time to apply for Post-Completion OPT to apply for STEM OPT. Your post-completion also needs to be approved before you can apply for STEM OPT.
What address should I use on my I-765?Provide a U.S. mailing address on your application that is valid at least five months from submitting your application. The address on your I-765 is where all correspondence will be sent once your application has been processed by USCIS, so having a stable address is important. USCIS will not forward immigration mail. If you move while the application is pending, be sure toupdate your address with USCISas soon as possible.Some documents, such as the EAD, may require a signature for delivery. If no one is present to sign for it or if you do not normally receive mail at that address the documents could be returned to USCIS.To authorize another individual to receive your mail, you can complete aStanding Delivery Orderwith USPS.You may also sign up for theInformed Deliveryservice by USPS to receive notifications about the delivery of your mail.Please note: ISSS does not allow students to use the Texas Global address on their I-765.
Provide a U.S. mailing address on your application that is valid at least five months from submitting your application. The address on your I-765 is where all correspondence will be sent once your application has been processed by USCIS, so having a stable address is important. USCIS will not forward immigration mail. If you move while the application is pending, be sure toupdate your address with USCISas soon as possible.
Some documents, such as the EAD, may require a signature for delivery. If no one is present to sign for it or if you do not normally receive mail at that address the documents could be returned to USCIS.
To authorize another individual to receive your mail, you can complete aStanding Delivery Orderwith USPS.
You may also sign up for theInformed Deliveryservice by USPS to receive notifications about the delivery of your mail.
Please note: ISSS does not allow students to use the Texas Global address on their I-765.
What should I do if I have a problem with my OPT application?If there is an error on your Receipt Notice or EAD:Contact USCISdirectly to request a correction if there is an error in your date of birth, name, or EAD dates. If you have any questions about this, pleaseschedule an General Consultation appointmentonline to talk to an International Student Advisor in ISSS.If you receive a Request for Evidence (RFE):Schedule an appointmentas soon as possible to review the RFE with an International Student Advisor in ISSS as this will be time-sensitive. If you cannot find an appointment soon, please emailhotline@austin.utexas.edu.If your Notice or EAD is lost in the mail:Check your case statusonline regularly once you have a receipt number to see if USCIS mails you anything related to this application.Submit an inquirywith USCIS online if something is not delivered to the address you indicated on the application.Contacting U.S. Citizenship & Immigration Services (USCIS):A ticket is opened each time you contact USCIS. Contacting USCIS multiple times could cause delays and slow down your case.Only the applicant can contact USCIS about the case. USCIS will not accept calls from ISSS staff.If you are not sure whether or not it is appropriate to contact USCIS, please feel free to check with ISSS first.Track your case statusSubmit an online case inquiry with USCISCall USCIS National Customer Service Center: 1-800-375-5283
If there is an error on your Receipt Notice or EAD:
Contact USCISdirectly to request a correction if there is an error in your date of birth, name, or EAD dates. If you have any questions about this, pleaseschedule an General Consultation appointmentonline to talk to an International Student Advisor in ISSS.
If you receive a Request for Evidence (RFE):
Schedule an appointmentas soon as possible to review the RFE with an International Student Advisor in ISSS as this will be time-sensitive. If you cannot find an appointment soon, please emailhotline@austin.utexas.edu.
If your Notice or EAD is lost in the mail:
Check your case statusonline regularly once you have a receipt number to see if USCIS mails you anything related to this application.
Submit an inquirywith USCIS online if something is not delivered to the address you indicated on the application.
Contacting U.S. Citizenship & Immigration Services (USCIS):
A ticket is opened each time you contact USCIS. Contacting USCIS multiple times could cause delays and slow down your case.
Only the applicant can contact USCIS about the case. USCIS will not accept calls from ISSS staff.
If you are not sure whether or not it is appropriate to contact USCIS, please feel free to check with ISSS first.
Track your case statusSubmit an online case inquiry with USCISCall USCIS National Customer Service Center: 1-800-375-5283
What do I need to travel internationally after my Pre-Completion OPT is approved?While on Pre-Completion OPT, you are still a current student at UT. In addition to carrying your OPT EAD Card, you should have all of the documents recommended for current F-1 students at UT.For more details on traveling internationally, please review the F-1 and J-1 Students section of ourKnow Before You Travelpage.If your visa has expired or will expire before you re-enter the U.S., you will also need to renew your F-1 visa. For more information on visa renewal, please visit ourApplying for a U.S. Visapage.
While on Pre-Completion OPT, you are still a current student at UT. In addition to carrying your OPT EAD Card, you should have all of the documents recommended for current F-1 students at UT.
For more details on traveling internationally, please review the F-1 and J-1 Students section of ourKnow Before You Travelpage.
If your visa has expired or will expire before you re-enter the U.S., you will also need to renew your F-1 visa. For more information on visa renewal, please visit ourApplying for a U.S. Visapage.
Still have questions?
International Student Advisors are available to assist you with your questions about Pre-Completion OPT.
For general questions or requests, please emailhotline@austin.utexas.edu.
For non-general inquiries, pleaseschedule an appointmentto speak with an International Student Advisor.
Please keep in mind that International Student Advisors are trained in student visa topics. For information on employer-sponsored visas or residency applications, please consult with your employer's representative or a qualifiedImmigration Attorney.
Curricular Practical TrainingEconomic Hardship EmploymentPost-Completion Optional Practical TrainingPre-Completion Optional Practical TrainingSTEM Optional Practical Training
Curricular Practical Training
Economic Hardship Employment
Post-Completion Optional Practical Training
Pre-Completion Optional Practical Training
STEM Optional Practical Training