URL: https://global.utexas.edu/isss/immigration/f-1/employment/stem-opt

STEM Optional Practical Training
STEM OPT is a 24-month extension of Post-Completion Optional Practical Training (OPT) authorization available to F-1 students who graduated with a U.S. degree in an approved science, technology, engineering, or mathematics field and who will be working for an employer who is part of the E-Verify program. Eligible F-1 students must work with ISSS to receive a STEM OPT I-20 and then submit their STEM OPT application to U.S. Citizenship & Immigration Services (USCIS) for processing.
Fast Facts
Apply early. USCIS processing times for STEM OPT applications can take over 3 months.
You may apply for the STEM OPT extension up to 90 days before your 12-month post-completion OPT Employment Authorization Document expires. USCIS must receive the application no later than the 12-month OPT expiration date.
If you properly file your STEM OPT application on time, you may work up to 180 days beyond the expiration date of your original OPT EAD while the STEM application is pending with USCIS.
There is anOPT Administrative Feefor all STEM OPT extension applications. The fee is charged even if your employer will file the STEM OPT application on your behalf.
You are allowed up to 150 days of cumulative unemployment during your OPT period, including both your initial OPT period and the STEM OPT extension period. Should you accumulate 150 days or more of unemployment, you are considered to be in violation of your F-1 immigration status and must depart the United States immediately.
Eligibility
The primary major CIP code, found on the first page of the I-20, must appear on the most recentSTEM Designated Degree Program List.
Employment must be paid while on STEM OPT.
Applicant must be working on post-completion OPT.
Applicant must be working for an E-Verify employer while on STEM OPT. USCIS has created an onlineE-Verify Employer Search Tool.
Applicant must be working directly for the employer.
Applicants must be supervised by the employer and not by a client of the employer.
Applicant and employer must complete theI-983 Training Plan.
Applying for STEM OPT
Review the STEM OPT ModulesThere is a great deal of information you, the F-1 student, need to understand about STEM OPT before you apply. We have created these instructional modules to help you learn what you need to know. Please review them in full.STEM OPT: Overview and EligibilitySTEM OPT: When to ApplySTEM OPT: How to ApplySTEM OPT: While STEM OPT is PendingSTEM OPT: After STEM OPT is Approved
Review the STEM OPT Modules
There is a great deal of information you, the F-1 student, need to understand about STEM OPT before you apply. We have created these instructional modules to help you learn what you need to know. Please review them in full.
STEM OPT: Overview and Eligibility
STEM OPT: When to Apply
STEM OPT: How to Apply
STEM OPT: While STEM OPT is Pending
STEM OPT: After STEM OPT is Approved
Pay the OPT Administrative FeePay theOPT Administrative Feeat least 24 hours prior to submitting your application materials to ISSS.
Pay the OPT Administrative Fee
Pay theOPT Administrative Feeat least 24 hours prior to submitting your application materials to ISSS.
Submit the STEM OPT Request formSubmit theSTEM OPT Request formwith the following materials for your STEM OPT Request in myIO:Completed and printed outForm I-983(I-983 Instructions).Copy of your newest passport.Copy of the passport you used most recently to enter the U.S. from abroad. (This may or may not be your newest passport.)Copy of your F-1 visa (or most recent entry visa).Most recently issued I-94 (paper orelectronic I-94).Copy of your previous EAD's (front and back).Copy of diploma ANDofficial transcriptshowing your graduation from an eligible STEM field.For more detailed information, please review the relevant STEM OPT Modules:STEM OPT: How to Apply
Submit the STEM OPT Request form
Submit theSTEM OPT Request formwith the following materials for your STEM OPT Request in myIO:
Completed and printed outForm I-983(I-983 Instructions).
Copy of your newest passport.
Copy of the passport you used most recently to enter the U.S. from abroad. (This may or may not be your newest passport.)
Copy of your F-1 visa (or most recent entry visa).
Most recently issued I-94 (paper orelectronic I-94).
Copy of your previous EAD's (front and back).
Copy of diploma ANDofficial transcriptshowing your graduation from an eligible STEM field.
For more detailed information, please review the relevant STEM OPT Modules:
STEM OPT: How to Apply
Submit your application to USCISOnce you receive your STEM OPT I-20 from ISSS, you can file your application with USCIS online (strongly recommended) or by mail. ISSS only provides published instructions on how to file online, which you can find here:STEM OPT: How to Apply
Submit your application to USCIS
Once you receive your STEM OPT I-20 from ISSS, you can file your application with USCIS online (strongly recommended) or by mail. ISSS only provides published instructions on how to file online, which you can find here:
STEM OPT: How to Apply
Applying for STEM OPT outside Austin
You do not need to be in Austin to apply for STEM OPT. All STEM OPT applicants must submit their request for a STEM OPT I-20remotely via myIO. Your case will be assigned to an international student advisor. The advisor will review your documents and let you know if any edits need to be made. When ready, the ISSS advisor will issue your STEM OPT extension I-20 and email you instructions on how to file your application with USCIS.
Note: All STEM OPT applicants must be in the U.S. to apply for STEM OPT.
Report STEM OPT Employment
Please log intomyIOat your required reporting periods (6, 12, 18, and 24 months from the start of your STEM OPT) and any time there is a change to your employment.
Once your STEM OPT is approved and your EAD card arrives, upload a copy for ISSS to review, throughmyIO. This is an important step because it allows ISSS to review important details in your immigration record and make any corrections if necessary.
STEM OPT Reporting
Reporting requirements are outlined below and in our module,STEM OPT: After STEM OPT is Approved.
Information You Must Keep Up to Date
While engaged in Optional Practical Training, including during the STEM OPT extension period, you are still considered to be in F-1 student status and are required toreport your employment informationthroughout your OPT/STEM OPT period.
Immigration regulations require you to report certain information to ISSS at 6-month intervals, even if your information has not changed.
If your information does change, you must report it within 10 days of the change or be considered in violation of your immigration status.
Employment Information to Report
6-month validation reports:Every six months (i.e., 6, 12, 18, and 24 months from your STEM EAD start date), you must log intomyIOand verify that your employment and local address details are correct. Reporting your employment will allow the Department of Homeland Security (DHS) to verify that you are currently employed and not in violation of the 150-day unemployment rule.
Change in current employment details:You are responsible for updating any changes to your employment within 10 days. You can review the official details of your employment in your SEVP Portal account. The information in the SEVP Portal comes directly from what you have reported to ISSS, either when requesting your STEM OPT I-20 or in subsequent updates. Do not change information directly in the SEVP Portal; you should only use it to view information, not to update information. Any time there is a change to your employment details as listed on your I-983 or in the SEVP Portal (change in job title, duties, employer site, employer name/EIN/E-Verify number, etc.), you must report the change viamyIO. Use theSTEM Employment Updateform in myIO.
Changing employers:If you change employers, you must complete reporting requirements for the employer you are leaving and the employer you are joining.
Employer you are leaving:
Work with your employer to complete the "Final Evaluation on Student Progress (I-983, p. 5) no later than your last day of employment.
Log into myIO and submit theSTEM Report End Employmentform within 10 days of your last day of employment.
Employer you are joining:
Work with your new employer to complete pp. 1-4 of the I-983 Training Plan.
Log into myIO and submit theSTEM Report New Employmentform (you will need to upload the I-983 Training Plan). Ideally, this should be done 3 weeks prior to starting your new job. It must be done no later than 10 days from your new job start date.
Change of Home Address, Email Address and Phone Number
Make sure that the local address inMyUT/UT Directis where you are currently living. Update your address inMyUT/UT Directwithin 10 days of any change. ISSS will push your address update to the SEVIS immigration database.
Discontinuing STEM OPT Due to Departure from U.S. or Change of Immigration Status
If you depart the U.S. prior to your STEM OPT EAD end date and you no longer wish to use your STEM OPT authorization, submit theEarly Completion of STEM OPTform inmyIOafteryou have departed the U.S. An international student advisor will close your SEVIS record and report your departure from the United States.
If you are approved for a change in your immigration status prior to your STEM OPT end date, submit theEarly Completion of STEM OPTform inmyIO. An international student advisor will close your SEVIS record and report your change of status.
Starting a New Program of Study at UT Austin
Log intomyIOto submit your request for an updated I-20 to start a new program of study at UT Austin. Classes must begin within 5 months of your STEM OPT end date. Your STEM OPT work authorization will automatically end on your STEM EAD end date or on the date you register for classes in the new program, whichever is earlier.
Starting a New Program of Study at a Different School
Log intomyIOto submit your request to transfer your SEVIS record to start a new program of study at a different institution. Classes must begin within 5 months of your STEM OPT end date or your SEVIS transfer release date, whichever is earlier. Your STEM OPT work authorization will automatically end on your STEM EAD end date or on your SEVIS transfer release date, whichever is earlier.
Still have questions?
International Student Advisors are available to assist you while you are on STEM OPT. For general questions or requests, please emailhotline@austin.utexas.edu. For non-general inquires, pleaseschedule an appointmentto speak with an International Student Advisor.
Please keep in mind that International Student Advisors are trained in student visa topics. For information on employer-sponsored visas or residency applications, please consult with your employer's representative or a qualified Immigration Attorney.
Curricular Practical TrainingEconomic Hardship EmploymentPost-Completion Optional Practical TrainingPre-Completion Optional Practical TrainingSTEM Optional Practical Training
Curricular Practical Training
Economic Hardship Employment
Post-Completion Optional Practical Training
Pre-Completion Optional Practical Training
STEM Optional Practical Training