URL: https://global.utexas.edu/isss/immigration/on-campus-employment

On-Campus Employment
On-campus employment takes place on the school’s premises, and the paycheck is issued by The University of Texas at Austin. If you are applying for a job on campus and you learn that an entity other than The University of Texas at Austin is going to pay you, please check with an Immigration Advisor before accepting the job.
All students must maintain a full course of study and have valid documentation in order to work on campus.
Note: Working off campus is not permitted without specific permission from Texas Global or from U.S. Citizenship & Immigration Services.
F-1 Students
You may work up to 20 hours per week during the fall and spring semesters. Full-time employment (21+ hours per week) is allowed only during vacation periods for enrolled and continuing students. No special permission is necessary, however, a valid I-20 issued by The University of Texas at Austin is required. If you will graduate, then you are only eligible to work on campus until the graduation date of your final semester.
J-1 Students
You may work up to 20 hours per week during the fall and spring semesters. Full-time employment (21+ hours per week) is allowed only during vacation periods for enrolled and continuing students.
If your DS-2019 is issued by another agency then there must be written authorization from the program sponsor allowing you to work on the UT campus.
J-1 Employment Authorization
If you are a J-1 student with on-campus employment, you must be authorized to begin work prior to your start date and anytime there is a change.
Before You Look For a Job
Consider the following before you begin your job search:
International students should seek jobs that are for only 20 hours/week or fewer during the long semesters.
Remember that paychecks should be issued specifically by The University of Texas at Austin. If in doubt, ask the department's HR representative.
International students are not eligible for the federal work/study program.
Not all jobs on12twentyare considered on-campus employment. If in doubt, contact Texas Global.
If you have a question about whether or not a particular job is considered on-campus employment, contact Texas Global athotline@austin.utexas.edu.
Finding a Job
UT Austin Human Resourcesis the best starting point for on-campus jobs.
Visit your academic department and inquire about any job openings.
Ask about job openings at the following offices on campus:Texas Union and the Student Activity CenterUT Libraries(there are several libraries on campus)UT Gyms and Rec SportsUT Computer LabsUT Housing and Food Services(Kinsolving Building)University Co-op(although this bookstore is physically across from the UT campus, it is considered on-campus employment).
Texas Union and the Student Activity Center
UT Libraries(there are several libraries on campus)
UT Gyms and Rec Sports
UT Computer Labs
UT Housing and Food Services(Kinsolving Building)
University Co-op(although this bookstore is physically across from the UT campus, it is considered on-campus employment).
Jobs Not Considered On-Campus Employment
The following employers would not be considered on-campus employment. International students who wish to work for any of these employers would require off-campus work authorization prior to beginning work. Please note that the list below is not exhaustive. When in doubt, contact Texas Global for assistance.
The Carillon at the AT&T Center
UTalk and Ruffalo Cody call center (usually affiliated with Texas Exes)
Construction companies doing work on the UT campus
Starbucks on 24th Street
Ride in Austin, Uber, Lyft, and other ride-share companies
Tutoring online and private tutoring (not specifically paid by UT)
For compensated research participation, check the source of payment even if it is cash or a gift card
Freelance or contract work (example: code writing or freelance journalism)
On-Campus Job Checklist
Congratulations on securing an on-campus job!  As a new employee at UT Austin, you will need to complete the required onboarding process inWorkday. The followingstep-by-step guidewill assist you in successfully navigating through all required sections, as missing information can cause glitches between your Workday and myIO accounts.
Employment Verification Letter
Your supervisor must complete anemployment verification letterfor use as evidence of on-campus employment when applying for aSocial Security Number.
Electronic Funds Transfer
You should arrange for anElectronic Funds Transfer(EFT) if you work on campus or receive scholarship payments. Before you can establish EFT, you need to open an account at a local bank.
F-1 StudentsJ-1 Exchange VisitorsFull-Time Enrollment Requirements for F-1 and J-1 StudentsH-1B Faculty and EmployeesImmigration UpdatesOther Immigration StatusesApplying for a U.S. VisaInviting Family to VisitKnow Before You TravelStudent Immigration StatusesOn-Campus EmploymentCampus ResourcesKnow Your RightsFinding an Attorney
F-1 Students
J-1 Exchange Visitors
Full-Time Enrollment Requirements for F-1 and J-1 Students
H-1B Faculty and Employees
Immigration Updates
Other Immigration Statuses
Applying for a U.S. Visa
Inviting Family to Visit
Know Before You Travel
Student Immigration Statuses
On-Campus Employment
Campus Resources
Know Your Rights
Finding an Attorney