URL: https://www.ucdenver.edu/services/international-student-and-scholar-services/students/employment-internships/on-campus-employment#ft-finding-a-job-0

F-1 and J-1 International Students are allowed up to 20 hours of on-campus employment when class is in session. On-Campus employment is only a benefit for F-1 and J-1 Students, other international Visa holders must seek additional approval for employment
    [8 CFR 214.2(f)(9)(i)].
Eligibility
Pre-Conditions:Students may need to seek approval before starting any employment on campus. J-1 Exchange Visitors must receive prior approval from ISSS before beginning a position on campus. International students are not eligible for
    Work-Study positions.
Hours per Week:20 hours per week while school is in session, and 40 hours per week during scheduled breaks such as summer and winter break.
Duration:Students can only remain employed as long as they are in status as an F-1/J-1 student at CU Denver. Once a student has graduated or falls out of status for another reason, they are no longer eligible to work on-campus.
Location:CU Denver defines an on-campus job as a position that is located on the Auraria Campus, Anschutz Medical Campus, or Denver South Campus that serves the student body or the campus. Positions that do not fit within this position
    are not eligible for on-campus approval. Employment at the Community College of Denver, or Metro State University on the Auraria campus is NOT considered on campus. Additionally, any position at the CU System Office is not considered on-campus.
Finding a Job
Have an On-Campus Job?
If you are interested in finding an on-campus job you may search through Handshake a portal for job searching, and ask departments or on-campus entities if they are hiring.
Once you have been offered the position and accepted, you can seek a social security number (SSN). See our page on how to get a social security number on ourSocial Security and Tax Infopage.
If you already have an on-campus job, you may need to request a social security number.  You’ll need to have theOn-Campus Employment Formfilled
 out by you and your employer. Once you have it completed you can:
Handshake CU Denver
Handshake Anschutz