URL: https://www.ucdenver.edu/services/international-student-and-scholar-services/students/employment-internships/f-1-cpt

Curricular Practical Training (CPT) is an F-1 work authorization to allow students to gain professional experiences while meeting academic requirements for their degree program.
According tothe F-1 regulations, CPT must be “an integral part of an established curriculum.” When you prepare to submit a CPT request, please consider how you will connect the internship or professional experience to your academic requirements
You must be maintaining your F-1 status as a student at the University of Colorado Denver | Anschutz Medical Campus. You cannot start CPT before the start of your first term at CU Denver or CU Anschutz.
You must be meeting theF-1 enrollment requirementsfor students in your program at the time you request CPT. You must have
    completed at least two consecutive semesters for F-1 eligible enrollment before you can request CPT. The two consecutive semesters can only include the fall and spring semesters.
Graduate students may be eligible for an exception to the two-semester requirements if immediate participation in CPT is required to meet an academic requirement for their program.
You must be enrolled full-time based on the current F-1 regulations [8 CFR 214.2(f)(6)] andrequirements for your programor
 have anapproved F-1 reduced course load. You must also be considered in good academic standing
    by your school or college.
CPT can be approved for part-time (20 hours or less) per week, or full-time (21 hours or more) per week.
ISSS must approve a CPT request for specific dates. Those dates will appear in the Employment Authorization section on page 2 of your I-20. ISSS approves CPT on a semester-by-semester basis. If your CPT is based on course enrollment, the CPT must start
    after the previous semester has ended and must end when the semester ends.
If you use 12 months or more of full-time CPT, you will be ineligible for Optional Practical Training (OPT) but may continue to use full-time CPT until you complete your degree.
For detailed information about CPT requirements, please review the F-1 Students CPT Policy and the CPT Eligibility Course.
If you have determined that you are eligible for CPT, you will then need to determine how you will meet the academic requirements for CPT.
The four major options for meeting the CPT academic requirements are listed below:
Practical Training Experience is required for a student's degree
Practical Training Experience is required for a student's degree
Practical Training Experience is required to earn internship/practicum/independent study credit for which the student will be registered
Practical Training Experience is required to earn internship/practicum/independent study credit for which the student will be registered
Practical Training Experience will provide research that is necessary for the student's thesis or dissertation
Practical Training Experience will provide research that is necessary for the student's thesis or dissertation
Practical Training Experience will yield a project for a particular course that is required by the student's degree program
Practical Training Experience will yield a project for a particular course that is required by the student's degree program
If you would like to learn the details about each of these options, please review the CPT Eligibility Course and the CPT Academic Options Guide.
If you have found an internship or other professional experience and are ready to start the CPT Request process, you must first complete theCPT Eligibility Course.
The CPT Eligibility Course reviews in detail the CPT requirements and the steps to request CPT.
You must complete theCPT Eligibility Courseand score 100% on the final quiz to be eligible to submit your first CPT Request.
Start the CPT processat least two to three weeks before your expected start dateto ensure you can start your position on time.
Please review the CPT Eligibility Course carefully for any additional requirements and steps.
CPT Eligibility Course
CPT for F-1 Students Policy
CPT Academic Options Guide
CPT Offer Letter Template
MyISSS